Navigating Code
With the different windows of
the debugger mapped out,
it is time to navigate
the assembly code.
When loaded, the application execution
was halted at the program entry point,
as indicated by the word “Paused” in
the lower right corner of the debugger.
We can now execute instructions
one at a time using the
Debug > Step into or Debug > Step
over commands,
which have shortcut keys
of F7 and F8 respectively.
The difference between
the two is that Step
into will follow the execution
flow into a given function call,
while Step over will execute the
entire function and return from it.
Since the entry point in this
case does not coincide
with the beginning of
the main function,
our first goal is to find where the
main function is located in memory.
To do this, we can search
the process memory space
for the error message that was
included in the program source code.
To search, we right click inside
the disassembly window,
and select “Search for”
“All referenced text strings”
The result window clearly shows
the string we are looking for.
Double-clicking on that line,
we return to the disassembly window,
but this time inside the main function.
Depending on your screen resolution,
you may need to scroll down
in the disassembly window to
find the highlighted instruction.
In the disassembly,
we recognize the instructions
that display the error message string
as well as the call to
the string copy function.
Our interest lies in the string
copy function call itself,
so we can place a breakpoint
on this instruction.
A breakpoint is essentially an
intentional pause that can be set
by the debugger on any
program instruction.
To set a breakpoint on the
string copy function call,
we select the line in the disassembly
window and press F2.
Once set,
the breakpoint will show the instruction
line with a light blue highlight.
Next, we can continue
the execution flow
by selecting “Run” from the
“Debug” menu or by pressing F9.
Almost immediately,
the execution stops again
just before the call to
the string copy function
where we set our breakpoint
at address 004015AA.
EIP is set to this address as well
since it points to the next
instruction to be executed.
In the stack window,
we find the twelve
“A” characters from our
command line input,
…and the address of the
64-byte buffer variable
where these characters will be copied.
We can now step into the string copy call
via the Debug menu or by pressing F7.
Notice that the addresses
in the upper-left
assembly instruction
window have changed
because we are now inside
the string copy function.
Now, we can double-click on the
string copy destination address
in the stack pane
to better monitor the memory write
operations occurring at that address.
This changes the view of
the stack pane slightly.
Now, we see relative
(positive and negative) offsets
in the left-hand column
instead of real addresses:
Let’s take a closer look at
this stack window.
First, note that offset zero,
now highlighted and noted with an
arrow indicator, is address 0065FE70.
This is the beginning of
the destination buffer
where our input string of
A’s will ultimately be copied.
Since we defined a 64-byte
buffer in our program,
our buffer extends from
offset 0 to offset +40,
including the null terminator
for our character array.
Notice that there are what appear
to be return addresses in this buffer
as well as various other oddities.
Since we did not initialize, or clear,
our buffer when we defined it,
that space is filled with residual data,
which the debugger attempts to interpret.
When the time comes to copy
our array of A’s to the buffer,
this residual data will be overwritten.
Next, notice the return address of
004015AF at the top of the stack.
This is the address we’ll return to
when the string copy has completed
and correlates to the
MOV EAX,0 instruction
immediately following the call
to string copy that brought us here.
That CALL instruction pushed this
address on the stack automatically for us.
At this point we can let the execution
continue to the end of
the string copy function
by selecting “Execute till return” from
the Debug menu or by pressing Control-F9.
This will allow us to see
the result of the function.
Our twelve “A” characters have been
copied to the stack (into the buffer)
and we are clearly within the 64-byte
buffer limit imposed by the declared
local buffer variable size.
Before proceeding, make a mental note
of the address located at offset
4C from the buffer variable.
This is the main function
return address,
the address of the instruction
we’ll return to
once the main function
has completed its execution.
We will see this in action in a moment.
Now that the string copy function
has completed its execution
and all data has been copied
into the destination buffer,
it’s time to return the
execution to main
through the RETN, or return,
assembly instruction.
This instruction “pops” the value at
the top of the stack into the EIP register
instructing the CPU to execute
the code at that location next.
If we single-step through this
RETN instruction with F7,
…we arrive back at the main
function address as expected
since this is the next address
after the string copy call.
The next instruction, MOV EAX, 0
is the equivalent of the “return 0"
in our original source code and sends
the exit status 0 to the operating system.
At this point, we have reached
the main function epilogue.
The main function will
simply return the execution
to the very first piece of code created
by the compiler that initially set up
and called the main function itself.
The next instruction, LEAVE, puts
the return address at offset 4C
(from the beginning of our buffer variable)
onto the top of the stack.
Then, the RETN assembly instruction
pops the main function return address
from the top of the stack
and executes the code there.
We must linger at this point a while
longer to understand the bigger picture.
In this case, there are no boundary checks
on the size of the copy in our C code,
therefore if we pass a longer
string as an input to our program,
enough data will be written
to the stack and eventually
we should be able to overwrite the return
address of the main parent function
located at offset 4C from
the buffer variable.
This means that if the return address
overwrite is performed correctly,
the instruction pointer will
end up under our control
as it will contain some of
our argument data
when the main function
returns to the parent.